## OpenChain Contribution Specification

## Version 1.0 DRAFT

# Production Status 

This Specification is NOT intended for use. It is currently being drafted as a PROPOSAL by the OpenChain Project community. Please track our open issues on GitHub to help develop the document. Submit ideas as comments to issues or open new issues.

Get started: [https://github.com/OpenChain-Project/Contribution-Process-Specification/issues](https://github.com/OpenChain-Project/Contribution-Process-Specification/issues)

The current process for the this document is:
- Collect ideas during the "blue sky" period, positioning the document as a proposal, until the community contributors believe it is ready for more formal review
- Seek guidance from the OpenChain Steering Committee on appropriate next step for the proposal when it is functionally complete / coherent as a "draft work product"
- If approved by the OpenChain Steering Committee, proceed to the formal OpenChain specification development track, which would result in a de-facto industry standard
- Alternatively, the material may be repurposed for non-specification reference material etc. based on feedback from the Steering Committee

## Contents

### Introduction and Overview of Intent 

### 1 - Scope

### 2 - Terms and definitions

### 3 - Requirements

- 3.1 - Program foundation

... [PLACEHOLDER] 

- 3.2 - Relevant tasks defined and supported

... [PLACEHOLDER] 

- 3.3 - Open source content review and approval

... [PLACEHOLDER] 

- 3.5 - Adherence to the specification requirements
- - 3.5.1 - Conformance
- - 3.5.2 - Duration

# Introduction

... [PLACEHOLDER] 

This document defines the key requirements of a quality open source contribution program. This document focuses on the "what" and "why" aspects of a program rather than the "how" and "when". This ensures flexibility for different organizations of different sizes in different markets to choose specific policy and process content that fits their size, goals and scope. For instance, an OpenChain conformant program may address a single product line or the entire organization.

This document is being developed as an open initiative. Insight into its historical development can be obtained by reviewing the Specification [mailing list](https://lists.openchainproject.org/g/specification) and [Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)](https://www.openchainproject.org/resources/faq).

This specification is licensed under [Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) (CC-BY-4.0).

## Information technology — OpenChain Contribution Specification

## 1 - Scope

This document specifies the key requirements of a quality open source contribution program in order to provide a benchmark that builds trust between organizations exchanging software solutions comprised of open source software.

## 2 - Terms and definitions

For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply. These terms and definitions only apply to this specific version of the specification.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as:

"MUST" This word, or the terms "REQUIRED" or "SHALL", mean that the
definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.

"MUST NOT" This phrase, or the phrase "SHALL NOT", mean that the
definition is an absolute prohibition of the specification.

"SHOULD" This word, or the adjective "RECOMMENDED", mean that there
may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a
particular item, but the full implications must be understood and
carefully weighed before choosing a different course.

"SHOULD NOT" This phrase, or the phrase "NOT RECOMMENDED" mean that
there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances when the
particular behavior is acceptable or even useful, but the full
implications should be understood and the case carefully weighed
before implementing any behavior described with this label.

"MAY" This word, or the adjective "OPTIONAL", mean that an item is
truly optional. One vendor may choose to include the item because a
particular marketplace requires it or because the vendor feels that
it enhances the product while another vendor may omit the same item.
An implementation which does not include a particular option MUST be
prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does
include the option, though perhaps with reduced functionality. In the
same vein an implementation which does include a particular option
MUST be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which
does not include the option (except, of course, for the feature the
option provides.)

These definitions are originally from IETF RFC 2119:
https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt
We reviewed the ISO definitions to confirm no conflict:
https://www.iso.org/foreword-supplementary-information.html

### 2.X - compliance artifacts

a collection of artifacts that represent the output of a compliance program and accompany the supplied software

Note: The collection may include (but is not limited to) one or more of the following: attribution notices, source code, build and install scripts, copy of licenses, copyright notices, modification notifications, written offers, open source component bill of materials, and SPDX documents.

### 2.X - identified licenses

a set of open source software licenses identified as a result of following an appropriate method of identifying open source components from which the supplied software is comprised

### 2.X - OpenChain conformant

a program that satisfies all the requirements of this document

## 2.X - open source

software subject to one or more licenses that meet the Open Source Definition published by the Open Source Initiative (see [opensource.org/osd](https://opensource.org/osd)) or the Free Software Definition published by the Free Software Foundation (see [gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html)) or similar license

## 2.X - program

the set of policies, processes and personnel that comprise an organization's open source license compliance activities

## 2.X - program participants

any organization employee or contractor that defines, contributes to or has responsibility for preparing supplied software

Note: Depending on the organization, that may include (but is not limited to) software developers, release engineers, quality engineers, product marketing and product management.

## 2.X - software bill of materials (SBOM)

a “Software Bill of Materials” (SBOM) is a inventory for software, a list of ingredients that make up software components. An example is the (Software Package Data Exchange) SPDX specification created by the Linux Foundation's SPDX Project to exchange bill of materials for a given software package (see spdx.org). Regardless of the SBOM specification used, it should follow a complete profile for the intended use case.

## 2.X - supplied software

software that an organization distributes to third parties (e.g., other legal entities, other organizations or individuals)

## 2.X - verification materials

materials that demonstrate that a given requirement of the specification is satisfied

ISO and IEC maintain terminological databases for use in standardization at the following addresses:

— ISO Online browsing platform: available at [https://www.iso.org/obp](https://www.iso.org/obp)

— IEC Electropedia: available at [http://www.electropedia.org/](http://www.electropedia.org/)

# 3 - Requirements

... [PLACEHOLDERS BELOW FROM LICENSE COMPLIANCE 3.0 Draft as of 6th September 2023, discussion, changes and expansion expected]

## 3.1 - Program foundation

### 3.1.1 - Policy

... [PLACEHOLDER] 

If an organization considers contributions to open source projects, then

- a written policy shall exist that governs contributions to open source projects;
- the policy shall be internally communicated; and
- a process shall exist that implements the policy

#### Verification material(s):

If an organization permits contributions to open source projects, then the following shall exist:

- 3.5.1.1 - A documented open source contribution policy;
- 3.5.1.2 - A documented procedure that governs open source contributions; and
- 3.5.1.3 - A documented procedure that makes all program participants aware of the existence of the open source contribution policy (e.g., via training, internal wiki, or other practical communication method).

#### Rationale:

When an organization permits open source contributions, the intent is that the organization has given reasonable consideration to developing and implementing a contribution policy. The open source contribution policy can be made a part of the overall open source policy or be its own separate policy.

### 3.1.2 - Competence

... [PLACEHOLDER]

The organization shall

- Identify the roles and the corresponding responsibilities of those roles that affects the performance and effectiveness of the program;
- Determine the necessary competence of program participants fulfilling each role
- Ensure that program participants are competent on the basis of appropriate education, training, and/or experience;
- Where applicable, take actions to acquire the necessary competence; and
- Retain appropriate documented information as evidence of competence.

#### Verification material(s):

- 3.1.2.1 - A documented list of roles with corresponding responsibilities for the different participants in the program.
- 3.1.2.2 - A document that identifies the competencies for each role.
- 3.1.2.3 - Documented evidence of assessed competence for each program participant.

#### Rationale:

Ensure that the program participants have obtained a sufficient level of competence for their respective roles and responsibilities.

### 3.1.3 - Awareness

... [PLACEHOLDER]

The organization shall ensure that the program participants are aware of:

- The open source policy;
- Relevant open source objectives;
- Their contribution to the effectiveness of the program; and
- The implications of not following the Program's requirements.

#### Verification material(s):

- 3.1.3.1 - Documented evidence of assessed awareness for the program participants - which should include the program's objectives, one's contribution within the program, and implications of program non-conformance.

#### Rationale:

To ensure the program participants have obtained a sufficient level of awareness for their respective roles and responsibilities within the program.

### 3.1.4 - Program scope

... [PLACEHOLDER]

Different programs may be governed by different levels of scope. For example, a program could govern a single product line, an entire department or an entire organization. The scope designation needs to be declared for each program.

#### Verification material(s):

- 3.1.4.1 - A written statement that clearly defines the scope and limits of the program.

#### Rationale:

To provide the flexibility to construct a program that best fits the scope of an organization's needs. Some organizations could choose to maintain a program for a specific product line while others could implement a program to govern the supplied software of the entire organization.

## 3.2 - Relevant tasks defined and supported

### 3.2.1 - Access

... [PLACEHOLDER]

Maintain a process to effectively respond to external open source inquiries. Publicly identify a means by which a third party can make an open source compliance inquiry.

#### Verification material(s):

- 3.2.1.1 - Publicly visible method that allows any third party to make an open source license compliance inquiry (e.g., via a published contact email address, or the Linux Foundation's Open Compliance Directory).
- 3.2.1.2 - An internal documented procedure for responding to third party open source license compliance inquiries.

#### Rationale:

To ensure there is a reasonable way for third parties to contact the organization with regard to open source compliance inquiries and that the organization is prepared to effectively respond.

### 3.2.2 - Effectively resourced

... [PLACEHOLDER]

Identify and Resource Program Task(s):

- Assign accountability to ensure the successful execution of program tasks.
- Program tasks are sufficiently resourced:
  - Time to perform the tasks have been allocated; and
  - Adequate funding has been allocated.
- A process exists for reviewing and updating the policy and supporting tasks;

#### Verification material(s):

- 3.2.2.1 - Document with name of persons, group or function in program role(s) identified.
- 3.2.2.2 - The identified program roles have been properly staffed and adequate funding provided.
- 3.2.2.3 - Identification of expertise available to address contribution matters which could be internal or external.

#### Rationale:

To ensure: i) program responsibilities are effectively supported and resourced and ii) policies and supporting processes are regularly updated to accommodate changes in open source contribution best practices.

## 3.3 - Open source content review and approval

... [PLACEHOLDER]

## 3.X - Adherence to the specification requirements

### 3.5.1 - Conformance

In order for a program to be deemed OpenChain conformant, the organization shall affirm that the program satisfies the requirements presented in this document.

#### Verification material(s):

- 3.5.1.1 - A document affirming the program specified in §3.1.4 satisfies all the requirements of this document.

#### Rationale:

To ensure that if an organization declares that it has a program that is OpenChain conforming, that such program has met all the requirements of this document. The mere meeting of a subset of these requirements is not considered sufficient.

### 3.5.2 - Duration

A program that is OpenChain conformant with this version of the specification shall last 18 months from the date conformance validation was obtained. The conformance validation registration procedure can be found on the OpenChain project's website.

#### Verification material(s):

- 3.5.2.1 - A document affirming the program meets all the requirements of this document, within the past 18 months of obtaining conformance validation.

#### Rationale:

It is important for a program to remain current with the specification if an organization wants to assert conformance over time. This requirement ensures that the program's supporting processes and controls do not erode if an organization continues to assert program conformance over time.
